Okay, this is just a sound check. Bob, say
something. Hello, my name is Bob.
How many people check this door here? Probably
like 100. I don't know why they can't have it open.
Okay, this is Ron Shorn, and I'm interviewing Bob
Havlin at the American Astronomical Society
Berkeley meeting on June 6, 1993. So, Bob, for the
record, what's your full name? Robert James
Havlin. How do you spell that? H-A-V-L-E-N. Where
were you born? Utica, New York. And when? 1943. A
date? Oh, yes, September 16. How did you get
interested in astronomy in the first place? I
think it was a Boy Scout project or a science fair
project when I was in the sixth or seventh grade. I
had to draw some maps of the night sky and find
north. That started my desire to look through
telescopes and to buy a telescope and eventually
made my own telescope and Gradually became more
and more in contact with the astronomical
community. I was good at school. Where did you go to
undergrad school? Went to the University of
Rochester. And when did you graduate from there?
1965. And what was your major? Astrophysics. Did
you start out in astrophysics? I started out in
astrophysics. Why? Why did I start in
astrophysics? Because with my middle school and
high school experience in making my own telescope
and reading about astronomy, I decided that was an
area that I wanted to go into. As a matter of fact, I
only applied as an undergraduate to Cornell and to
the University of Rochester in New York State
because those were the only schools that had
undergraduate degrees in astronomy. Where did
you go to grad school and why? I went to the
University of Arizona because I realized that I
needed to be at a clear sight where I could get into
astronomy. It had a good national reputation. It
was growing. I applied to the University of
Michigan and to Harvard. I got accepted at
Michigan, didn't get accepted at Harvard, and
then Arizona and NASA traineeship and so on. It was
the best decision of my then young life because the
University of Arizona, of course, is right across
the street from Kitt Peak National Observatory.
So what did you do at Arizona? At Arizona, I... I got
interested in x-ray astronomy and optical
astronomy and no radio astronomy really. And
gradually did a thesis under Bengt Westerlund
using photographic data and photoelectric data
on Cepheids and OB associations and the
relationship of them. And when did you get out? Why
did you pick that? Why did I pick that? Was it the
person or the field? It was the... Person,
primarily. I think it was the ease with which I was
able to work with Dr. Westerlund and his vast
experience in the field of observational optical
astronomy. Of course, I was exposed to almost
everything there was to be exposed to back in the
late 1960s because of our interaction with Kitt
Peak National Observatory. And there were
theoreticians around. You know, I did fairly well
at most of my courses, but I found
after thinking about what I really wanted to do for
three or four months, I decided that I wanted to go
into studying Cepheids and OB associations with
Beck. He was an interesting guy. He had lots of
unreduced observational data to work with and was
inspirational in helping me decide what further
observations were to be made and so on. I think
that's Sort of a typical interaction. It wasn't a
question of money, as it is these days, because I
was supported by a NASA traineeship. Was that your
first contact with an ASA? Yes, basically it was.
When did you finish your degree? I finished in late
1969. When you were a grad student at Stewart, did
any of the infighting, well, or let's put it this
way, Kuiper and Bart Bock were perhaps not the
world's greatest friends? You know, I didn't
really get too much feel from that. I mean, Bock
came in 1967, after I'd been there a couple of
years. He was always telling stories about Kuiper
and Bach, and I don't know, there was another guy,
another Dutchman that came over to the U.S. about
the same time as those two, and I can't remember. I
think it was a guy
in Peter Zandekamp, was it? No, but it's in Ray
White's obituary about Bach, so we can look at it.
Yeah, yeah, it's kind of neat. Did... Did people at
Steward or Kitt Peak look down on planetary work as
far as you know? Did the grad students say, oh, if I
can't get in with somebody that does stellar work,
I'll have to do planetary work? Was any of that kind
of stuff still left when you were there? I don't
think so. Now that I think of it,
being a graduate student at Steward was an
interesting experience because you had lunar and
planetary lab right across the street. And the
people that did planetary science, like Tom
Garrels, like Pat Romer, I can't think of a few more
names that were associated with the lunar and
planetary. They were there, yeah, exactly. And I
never got the feeling that this was...
a secondary science. There was Bill Hartman, for
example. He was there. I mean, it was interesting
stuff. It just so happened that you really do have a
difference of opinion as to whether you want to go
into planetary science. I mean, planetary
science is almost like geology. It's close to
home. And at least that was my feeling. I didn't
want to get into planetary science. And I knew
other graduate students that really didn't want
to get into planetary science. They were more
interested in stars and galaxies. And that just is
sort of a natural, because there were graduate
students. As a matter of fact, Ben Zellner, who's
now, I guess he does asteroid work with Garrels.
There was Kofin. There was a few other graduate
students. Planetary science was a real
challenge. It just wasn't something that I wanted
to get into. Where'd you go after you got your
degree? uh in january of 1970 we packed our bags put
our car on a boat got on an airplane and went to chile
i uh i became a staff member at the european
southern observatory and primarily because
westerland my thesis advisor six months earlier
had become the director there and he said bob why
don't you come down for a year so i said fine a year
i'll go anywhere ended up being settled What did
you work on there in general? In general, I was a
staff astronomer, of course, and I had to assist in
all the equipment for all the visiting
astronomers in terms of Kude spectrographs,
Castorine spectrographs, single channel
photometers, and so on. And I continued my
interest in OB associations and started
surveying some of the southern Milky Way in terms
of accumulating data that would allow us to then
determine whether or not the young blue stars we
were detecting were actually members of
associations or whether they were just in the
field. And when did you leave there and why? I left
there in May of 1977 and we'd been in Chile seven
years and our daughters were then one and four
years so we decided to come back to the States and We
didn't want our kids growing up Chilean,
basically. And the position I got in the US was as a
lecturer at the University of Virginia in
Charlottesville. And I found it very difficult to
look for a position from outside the US to get back
into the US. And so I was very grateful to be able to
get some kind of temporary position from which I
could use as a base to look for a more permanent
position. And that fell into place,
unfortunately, upon the death of Nelson
Lindbergh. This is D. Nelson Lindbergh. D. Nelson
Lindbergh, exactly. And so what was this
permanent placement? Well, the position I got was
University of Virginia as lecturer. And I was
actually on the staff there for two years. And at
the end of the second year. Which would be 1979. In
the middle 90s, after academic year 78, 79, I then
took up a position at the National Radio Astronomy
Observatory, more of an administrative position
as assistant to the director with Mark Roberts. At
that point, it was better not to have to move the
family than to go to Washington, D.C. or someplace
like that. Why did they pick you? I was a warm body.
No, Mort Roberts and I got along very well. I had
worked earlier as a summer student at NRAO in 1964
in Greenbank with Mort. And I was interested in an
administrative position because I had been
interviewed. Actually, I had been offered a job at
the National Science Foundation by Bill Howard.
And so I was trying to decide, did I want to leave
Charlottesville and move to Washington or what?
And Mort had just taken a position as director at
NRAO about six months earlier. And he realized
that he needed help. So for me, it was a new
challenge I was happy to move into. How long did you
stay there? Oh, I was with the NRAO, actually,
until just the beginning of this year. I was in
Charlottesville until mid-1988. So that's 11
years in Charlottesville and an additional four
years in Socorro. At the VLA. At the VLA, right.
When you first went into the National Radio
Astronomy Observatory, did you notice any
difference between optical and radio
astronomers? As a matter of fact, I did. I've
always noticed a difference between optical and
radio astronomers. You want to know what that
difference is? Yes, you mean going back to grad
school days? Yeah, basically. I mean, in grad
school, I have to admit that I never really came
across that many radio astronomers. Oh, there was
Frank Lowe, and there was the odd, I mean... Rare.
The rare radio astronomer that would come
through. We did have one radio astronomer on the
staff, one official, quote-unquote, radio
astronomer on the staff at the University of
Arizona, and that was Andrei Pahulchik. And he
taught the course in radio astronomy, and I found
radio astronomy to be much, much greater, much
more intensity in real physics. That is, radio
astronomers seem much more solidly based and
solidly ground, if you will, in
techniques and a theory of physics. The
frustration, of course, with the radio
astronomers, I found, of course, was that they
didn't have any good angular resolution. They had
instrumentation that they had to be extremely
careful with. It seemed to me that radio
astronomers knew a lot more about the inner
workings of the computer than optical. I can't
take that back. Optical astronomers generally
knew a lot about their spectrographs and their
polarimeters and photometers because they had to
make it work. Radio astronomers... however, had
found the nice technique of relying upon a really
high-quality staff of radio engineers and
computer scientists. And so the actual
astronomers really didn't know that much about
the black boxes they were using, but the people
that did made everything work exceedingly well.
And at the NRIO, I noticed that most of the radio
astronomers that I dealt with hardly ever would,
they sort of looked down upon optical astronomy.
They didn't care really what a spectral type was or
what constellation or anything like that. They
were really retooled physicists or retooled ham
radio operators more than anything. Whereas
optical astronomers tended to be types that got
excited about astronomy from hands-on observing
experiences when they were either in high school
or college. And there was a rare optical
astronomer who got into optical astronomy
because they were good in physics and they were
good in theory and then got pushed into optical
astronomy. But in general, I thought the problems
that radio astronomers were asking and were able
to answer were a lot more in-depth in physics and
global problems than optical astronomers were
asking. Maybe that was naive, but that's my
impression. Okay, so this year, early this year, I
guess, you left Socorro, and where did you go? I
left the... Actually, I left the NRAO, and I left
Socorro both at the same time, and I'm now
executive director of the Astronomical Society
of the Pacific. And for me, it's an ideal position
because... You know, I've sort of been a hybrid
between optical and radio astronomy. I've never
really put my solid foot down and said, this is my
area, and I am pigeonholed forever. I just really
get excited about all problems in astronomy, and
I've always been involved with public outreach
and public information since coming back to the
NRAO. When I was in Chile, of course, I was working
hand-in-hand in glove with all the visiting
astronomers. So I got to see a broad perspective of
the type of problems that everybody that came to
the observatory was working on. And then when I
came back to the U.S., I was involved with radio
astronomy. So then I got a perspective of what it
is, what it means to be a millimeter-wave
astronomer or a centimeter-wave astronomer, or
even a long-wave astronomer, and what the
problems of resolution are. and different
wavelength approaches to different problems.
And so I found myself with quite a large global
perspective that I guess I'm really now able to
take advantage of in my dealings with the
astronomical community. Why did you make this
last jump? Was it because the opportunity was
there? Basically, it was the opportunity was
there. Andy Fracknoy had been the executive
director of the Astronomical Society of the
Pacific for the last 14 years or so. I saw the
advertisement in one of the, I think it was the
AAS's job newsletter, and said, I read the
description, you know, it must be this, it must be
that, and experience of this, experience of that.
I said, you know, this is a job I can do. I can do all
that stuff. I almost replied to that myself, and
that would have been some competition, except
that this NASA contract was already looking good.
I see, I see. We already had word that we got it, you
know, so... And also I have to add that it was more or
less an opportunity for me to be my own boss, as it
were. It's kind of hard to work year after year
after year, sometimes having ideas that your boss
doesn't necessarily share, enthusiasm,
support, and so on. And now in this position, I can
sort of make it or break it. I can pave new ground if I
really get enough energy up to do it. So you've done
optical, you've done radio, and now you have... I
have to do everything. I have to do everything.
Which is one of the reasons I want to interview,
because I'm going to start asking you some
questions now today.
How important do you think NASA money was to
helping astronomy in general and planetary
astronomy in particular take
off? Well, I don't know where to begin to answer
that question, of course, For NASA, to answer
about the importance of NASA money to astronomy in
general, I'd say that the educational
opportunities that NASA money afforded to people
like me, even though I never ended up in planetary
astronomy, the research that I did never really
affected any of the NASA missions. It was really
invaluable at the time because I was able to go
through graduate study without worrying about
teaching assistants or outside jobs or what have
you. Of course, I've seen the NASA money and the
support that it provided to the, I guess it was the
Mount Lemmon 61-inch telescope and all the
research work that got done there. NASA money...
You know, the telescope on Mauna Kea, there's a
NASA telescope there, infrared facility.
There's two, there's the 88 inch and the IRT.
That's right, that's right. And I think in
hindsight I would say NASA probably could have put
more money in ground support to some of their
missions than they did. I mean, it's always Ground
support has always been looked upon by the people
in national centers as only funded by the National
Science Foundation. The question has always been
raised, for example, how much impact will the
space telescope or any of the other NASA-funded
orbiting telescopes have on ground-based
facilities? And should NSF worry about having to
fund more ground support and so on? I mean, you get
the idea that the...
I think we've always worried about is
the demand for ground support going to overwhelm
the telescopes on the ground once we get all these
observations from space. And I think the answer
has been sort of halfway between the real terror
and the optimism. I mean,
my opinion has always been that, hey, there's only
24 hours in a day and there's a limited number of
astronomers. And if they're off getting X-ray
data, they don't have time to be getting radio data
from the ground or optical data from the ground.
There's no doubt that every single space
observatory that has returned data has changed
the character of the proposals that have been
submitted to the ground-based support . I mean,
for example, back in 1983, when IRS data started
coming down, the 12-meter telescope probably had
like 40, 50 percent of its proposals for the next
three or four years were always mentioning IRS
data this and IRS data this and we're following up
this from IRS and that from IRS. Basically, the
number of proposals did not overall to the
telescope didn't increase. The character of the
proposals changed because researchers were
getting data from infrared and now they wanted to
compare it to multi-wavelength. That's exactly
paralleled in planetary ground-based observing
every time a probe goes by. Exactly, exactly,
exactly. One question before I forget here,
because I skipped around a little bit. 30 years
ago, if we'd be in an AAS meeting, there'd just be
one AAS meeting. Everybody would be in here. Now,
you don't see many planetary papers. You don't see
many solar papers. We've got all these divisions,
high energy, astrophysics, solar astronomy,
planetary astronomy, historical astronomy. And
some of them have their own specialized journals
now. In addition, in the old days, it was APJ, AJ,
and PASB, Publications of the Astronomical
Society of the Pacific. Do you think these
subdivisions of the AS have been good or bad, or
just inevitable?
I think you put the nail on the head when you said
inevitable, because the general expansion of the
field makes it, I mean, even the American Physical
Society just cannot have a general meeting where
everybody exchanges information in a worthwhile
manner. on a broad diversity of topics. I mean, as
much as I, in the astronomical side of the Pacific,
feel that the public needs to be exposed to a broad
range of topics in a general sense, you know, solar
astronomy, planetary astronomy,
extra-galactic astronomy, all the wavelength
and so on, and it's good to meld them all into one
sort of uniform picture, at the detailed
professional level, where you're talking
researcher to researcher, The meetings, and
especially the division meetings, extremely
important that they're talking on the same
topics. You would totally dilute the effort if you
were to mix extragalactic types with the division
meetings. The data transmission rate would be
very low. On the other hand, it's also very
important, a very important part of these
meetings is to have the overall survey talk.
You'll find a very high percentage of the members
of the AAS are younger graduate students or people
that are in academic positions where they're
teaching on all subjects and for them to have a
broad perspective of what's going on in planetary
science or X-ray astronomy or high energy
astrophysics or you name it. In this meeting it
seems to be extreme ultraviolet astronomy and in
other meetings it's been IRAS and sometimes it's
the ultraviolet astro program I mean, it's
essential to have these overviews sort of cycle
around all the disciplines in astronomy so that
your younger folks or your people that are
teaching general courses and so on have a good
perspective of the big picture. You can't chop it
up so little that planetary sciences only go to
planetary science meetings. It's not fair. Do you
think planetary astronomy is part of astronomy?
Do I think it's part of astronomy? That's a good
question. I think it is part of astronomy, but I'm
asking myself, why do I think it's part of
astronomy? We use telescopes. That's right.
Planetary scientists use telescopes. Some of
them use space probes, however, which are not
really telescopes. It's more like a remote
geologist. You may have too much knowledge to
answer, so let me ask you this. You're the big
cheese at the PASB, and you ought to have your
finger on the pulse of this. Do you think the public
believes planetary astronomy is part of
astronomy? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. There's no doubt
about that. When people ask general questions
about astronomy or what draws them into the
interest of astronomy overall, one very
important part is planetary. After all, that's
what you can show them in a small telescope. I mean,
granted, they're going to ask questions about the
Big Bang or search for extraterrestrial
intelligence, but let's not forget that the
search for extraterrestrial intelligence is
related to planetary systems. And the more we know
about our planetary systems, for example, at the
ASP, the questions I get from the press are, or
radio and television stations, they increase
enormously during the time when we have a lunar
eclipse, a solar eclipse, a close cometary
approach, a meteor shower. These are things that
the public can easily identify because they can
easily see them. So from the public's
perspective, planetary astronomy may be the only
part of astronomy they ever come in contact with.
You think, you know, we've had 30 years and now we
can see details on Jupiter that we never saw, rings
around other planets than Saturn, Mars, pictures
in the surface. Do you think that's had any effect
on the public? I mean, has it changed the way they
look at things or their interests in planetary
astronomy, astronomy and science in general? Or
is it a passing fad? uh you know i think we have to be
careful answer a question like that because i
think that the space program in general and also
the the detailed information that comes from the
space probes about other planets in the solar
system has made the public almost take things for
granted i remember when i was in high school or when
you were in school You know, one space probe, one
space launch was a fantastic event. Nowadays, we
have shuttles get set up every month or two, and no
big deal. We don't go through the countdown. We
don't hear anything in the news. You know, we know
they're up there. We take it for granted that
they're doing good stuff. And another space probe
goes by. I mean, Voyager was a big deal, no doubt
about it. But, you know, does the public get
excited about another telescope getting
launched? astronomers make lots of noise about
it, and the amount of information that comes from
that new telescope can be overwhelming. There's
just so much data coming down. But the public is
sort of getting...
blase about the whole thing, taking things for
granted. Here's a question you don't have to be a
planetary astronomer to answer, but you have to
know something about astronomy and the funding
end and all that, and the public interest end. In 30
years now, we've looked all over the solar system,
haven't yet found a trace of present or previous
life anywhere except Earth. In particular, no
green men on Mars, not even a buck. Sure. Do you
think that's had a negative effect on public
interest funding or not? No, I don't think so. I
really don't think so. Why don't I think so? That's
the question. I mean, I think the search is fun, and
the questions always come down from the press or
from people that don't know a lot of details about
the types of search and so on. that have you found
it? Part
of the problem that the scientist has in
communicating science to the public
is related to their desire to know the biggest or
the smallest, the most distant or the closest, the
oldest or the youngest, or what's the latest
discovery. I mean, they think science is made up of
just eureka discoveries. And they don't really
understand the scientific curiosity process. So
I think there's an interest in the public. If you
say that you're looking for extraterrestrial
intelligence or you're looking for life in the
solar system, that's always a motivation to get
the public interested. They're always going to
ask you, did you find it?
But part of the challenge of being a scientist is to
give the public more
appreciation for the fact that it's the hunt
that's most important. It's the thrill of the
hunt, and that continues no matter what you find.
You open more unanswered doors than you do, you
know, you always ask more questions after you've
made an experiment than you answer. It's just
amazing. Here's a two-part question. One, do you
think astronomers in general have done a good job,
or as good a job as they could have been, in selling
themselves to the public and to the Congress? And
then I'm going to be specific and say, I believe
that the radio astronomers have always done their
infighting behind closed doors, spilt the blood
there, and come out charging with a unified front,
whereas the optical astronomers do all their
internecine strife on the stage. So pro, con, what
do you think? Yeah. Getting astronomers, getting
scientists in general, but the scientists I know
best are astronomers, and getting astronomers to
be forthright and to participate in public
outreach programs is a mixed bag. There's about, I
would say, like 10% of the astronomers on the staff
of major research facilities that are really
willing to be science for judges or to give tours to
observatories and so on. I think it's a lot
different when you get to the academic community
because their people are constantly dealing with
students and the public, and so the percentage
there probably is much higher. I think, and on that
basis I would say astronomers really haven't done
a good job, but I mean, how many astronomers do you
need to have out there One Carl Sagan is worth
10,000 other astronomers. And so it's kind of hard
to answer that question. Now, related to the
question of optical versus radio, I think you have
to be very, very careful.
Because radio astronomers have always been
really totally dependent very soon after the
beginning of radio astronomy. Radio astronomy
actually began in the 1930s and really wasn't
going full force until the 1950s after the war, and
very soon thereafter was the creation of national
observatories. So radio astronomers have
always, not always, but for the most part, have
been using national facilities. You just know
they cannot spend the money at a local university
to build an instrument big enough, so it's been
national facilities. And it's a much smaller
population of scientists, let's say probably
between 10% and 20% of the number of optical
astronomers. And so the people to do the fighting
are fewer. The efficiency of getting telescope
time for the members of the community because of
the existence of large national centers like
Arecibo and NRAO and so on, and some major
university facilities like Owens Valley and so
on. It's much more successful for radio
astronomers to get telescope time. Optical
astronomers, on the other hand, they come from a
different community at the outset.
Historically, they grew up in large private
telescopes like Lick and Mount Palomar and so on.
And so they were in-house type astronomers. And
only over the course of the last three decades, so
to speak, since the NSF was founded, have you
gotten astronomers spread out far and wide at
small schools and large schools and everywhere.
And they don't have their own telescopes. And so
there's the in-group, the people that have their
own private, as it were, major facility,
University of Texas, Caltech, Those big places,
Arizona and so on. And those people are sort of the
upper cream. The best scientists there always
have lots of telescope time. And you've got the
other community out there fighting for telescope
time because they don't have their own telescopes
over there. It seems to be a much, for one thing,
it's a much larger community. I'd like to say
before, probably a factor of 10 higher. and
there's not enough National Facility telescope
time to go around for this large mass of scientists
that are groping for time. So they tend probably,
you know, when it comes right down to it, it's easy
to say, you know, you iron your difficulties out in
private, but there's always somebody that walks
away feeling hurt whenever you have a discussion
about whether planetary science is better than
extragalactic or ultraviolet is better than
x-ray and so on. Somebody... In that connection,
planetary astronomy is really half and half. It
shares some characteristics with both, but what
I'm thinking of, for example, a 10-year
recommendation reports come together. The radio
astronomers seem to pick one thing and stick with
it. Planetary astronomers pick one thing and
stick with it. And then stellar and galactic and
extra-galactic optical astronomers keep right
on fighting even after it comes out. It seems like
it. It always seems that way. It does seem that way.
But I can tell you that there's plenty of hurt
people in the radio community too. Although they
came together and endorsed VLBA back in the early
eighties and lo and behold the darn thing is
constructed now because it was you know it was it
was it was a project that was ready to go when the
funding became available there are also a lot of
hurt people in the radio community that were
hoping for a 25 meter millimeter wave dish it never
happened and the NRAO is ready to go with a
millimeter array I don't know if it'll ever happen
And gradually the astronomers at some of the major
universities have started to build their own
millimeter array. Millimeter astronomers have
basically felt like they've been left off. And
it's an extremely powerful field. lately a lot of
astronomers, and we're talking optical, radio,
planetary, stellar, and whole, have been getting
a lot of publicity and evidently some money off of
projects that get a lot of public play, like search
for extraterrestrial intelligence, killer
asteroids, search for other solar systems, ozone
holes in the Earth's atmosphere. Do you think
they're overdoing that, or not? I think the public
is extremely interested in these type of
projects, and it's good that they get press. I
think astronomers have to be careful to spread the
press out to, and I think the AAS does a real good
job, and Steve Moran in the press office, in
getting the press interested in other ongoing
critical issues in astronomy. You have to
remember that some of those topics in modern
astronomy are pretty esoteric and hard to
describe to the public, so killer asteroids and
SETI and all those planetary-type stuff, that's
when, in one respect, planetary science has an
advantage. It's easier to communicate the
problem to the public. I don't think we can really
overdo it, communicating to the public, however.
And what's good for planetary science is in the
short run because their project is described well
to the press. It's good for astronomers in
general. Whether it's planetary, radio, or
optical, I think probably all in the same bathtub.
I mean, all in the same boat. And is the boat sailing
along nicely? Is it dead in the water? Or is it
sinking in general as far as, say, funding goes and
stuff like
that?
Well, I don't know. I have to be careful. Not
necessarily just funding, because we know that's
dead in the water. But what do you think? Use your
crystal ball. I mean, I've always felt that
we tend to get too greedy. We tend to get a major
facility and then milk it to death for data. And
we're never satisfied. There's another facility
we just have to have, another facility we just have
to have. And admittedly, it is a complex area
because you always need more resolution. You
always need a different wavelength coverage. And
the problems nowadays are not simply focused in
what you can get out of the ultraviolet data or what
you can get out of the infrared data. You have to put
the whole thing together in one big
multi-wavelength picture. And astronomers know
you need 20 telescopes and not just one. And
Congress wonders, well, jeez, I just gave you one.
Why do you need another one? But is the situation
healthy? I think that in terms of our ability to do
research, let's say the ability to gather the data
that we need, the situation is extremely healthy.
The question on an individual basis for an
individual that an individual exists at a
university or make a career you know there's a
threat there there's a threat there because the
funding the instruments the instruments are
there the data is there for the best people the
question about the question is what what about the
middle the middle pack is there enough funding to
attract the brightest students into the field to
keep them into the field and so on. And I think the
situation there is of great concern. The number of
PhDs that are generated is like a factor of three or
four at least, more than the number of real jobs.
And that's a concern. That's not healthy in the
long term. On the other hand, should there be a
continuous growth in the number of PhDs that are
created in a field like astronomy, I think we have
to reach a steady state. Otherwise, there won't be
any archaeologists left, and there won't be any
new farmers, and so on. I think one indicator of
public interest and the public taxpayer's
willingness to support, give money to astronomy,
are the fortunes of the Astronomical Society of
the Pacific. How are those doing now? Well, the
Astronomical Society of the Pacific had great
success in its programs primarily because it
addresses issues in education that there's a vast
pool of teachers out there that need help and
information on astronomy and the way to teach it to
kids and so on. Teachers that have not had any
formal training themselves and sometimes not
even formal training in science. The ASP has
extremely successful summer meetings that have
just grown by leaps and bounds in communicating
science in a very popular way and also addressing
some professional scientific topics as well as
teacher workshops and so on. The problem that the
ASP has is one that most nonprofit societies face
at one time or another, and that's the bottom line
in terms of getting the funds it requires just to
keep operating. I mean, it's a small society. Its
historical base is regional. It's so broad
It has been hard in the recent past to actually
attract funds, I guess, basically. I mean, in
terms of there's no real strong corporate
support. Those are some of the goals that I have in
getting strong corporate support and getting the
programs
underwritten by funding agencies or people that
are interested in education. and getting more
professional involvement in the society.
Some people join the society and after a year or two
they realize that they come to the conclusion that
they're not getting enough out of society to
continue being members. And my answer to them is,
hey listen, the society is made up of you. You maybe
don't have enough time to go out and talk to your
local school classes or to give a public lecture
and so on. But as a scientist, as an astronomer, you
should give some strong support and backing to
those people in the scientific community who are
willing to do the outreach programs that you uh...
basically are more should be morally obligated to
support because you're getting support from from
the public so you gotta give something back some
people just don't like to do that so why not you know
join the society and let the society do it for them
it's strong speak strongly with one voice so uh...
the society is uh... is in a great uh... state of
change right now in terms of expansion in terms of
uh... seeking uh... funding support in terms of
the type of programs we want to get into. I have no
doubt that we'll succeed in all this. This doesn't
have anything to do with the history of planetary
astronomy, but I've got to ask you, the very name,
Astronomical Society of the Pacific, implies
regional. You don't want to be just regional
anymore. I'm thinking of changing the name. That
question was put to me originally when I got
interested in the Society. I looked at it and I
said, yeah, yeah, you're right. The name is a
detriment. When somebody back in Georgia goes to
their dean and says they're going to publish a
paper in the PASP, he says, why the PASP? Why not the
PASA? If there's such a journal. Or if you go to the
University of Florida and say you want to have a
meeting of the ASP in Florida, they're going to
say, who's the ASP? But You have to remember the
society is a real venerable society. It's been
around for over 100 years. There's a very strong
following here on the West Coast and in several of
the states in the U.S. And we even have members from
70 foreign countries. There are plenty of other
organizations that exist with strange names. It
just makes it a little bit more of a challenge, a
little more of a challenge challenge to do our I
don't really feel that it's a time to upset the
apple cart by making a name change. A new director
and a new name change? No, no, no. We'll exist with
our own name. With our old name.